Agile Development of Linux Schedulers with Ekiben
Samantha Miller

Anirudh Kumar

Tanay Vakharia

University of Washington
USA

University of Washington
USA

University of Washington
USA

Danyang Zhuo

Ang Chen

Tom Anderson

Duke University
USA

Rice University
USA

University of Washington
USA

arXiv:2306.15076v1 [cs.OS] 26 Jun 2023

Abstract
Kernel task scheduling is important for application performance, adaptability to new hardware, and complex user requirements. However, developing, testing, and debugging
new scheduling algorithms in Linux, the most widely used
cloud operating system, is slow and difficult. We developed
Ekiben, a framework for high velocity development of Linux
kernel schedulers. Ekiben schedulers are written in safe Rust,
and the system supports live upgrade of new scheduling policies into the kernel, userspace debugging, and bidirectional
communication with applications. A scheduler implemented
with Ekiben achieved near identical performance (within 1%
on average) to the default Linux scheduler CFS on a wide
range of benchmarks. Ekiben is also able to support a range
of research schedulers, specifically the Shinjuku scheduler, a
locality aware scheduler, and the Arachne core arbiter, with
good performance.

1

Introduction

Kernel scheduler behavior is central to application performance, adaptability to new hardware, and complex user requirements. Many applications have short, latency sensitive
tasks and bursty workloads, where suboptimal kernel decisions can lead to high tail latency and poor overall job performance [23, 34, 56]. Heterogeneous hardware, such as nonuniform and tiered memory or accelerators, increases the
complexity of scheduling decisions [8, 54]. Energy use is also
increasingly important; neither underloading nor fully loading a server provides peak server energy efficiency [9, 36].
Additionally, applications may have information that can help
improve scheduling decisions, such as workload characteristics or hardware preferences, but in most kernels the scheduler
is oblivious to user preferences beyond simple priorities and
hand coded placement [53, 61].
Efficiently supporting these changes will require new scheduler designs or new features in existing schedulers. Although
kernel schedulers could theoretically be adapted to handle
these new demands, developing and testing new kernel schedulers can be difficult and time consuming. Kernel code is difficult to write correctly and debug and slow to deploy. There
are only three mainline schedulers implemented in the Linux
kernel, the most widely used cloud operating system.

To address this, some researchers have used kernel bypass
to implement new schedulers [23, 34, 56, 62]. This approach increases development velocity by removing the need to recompile the kernel and providing access to userspace debugging
tools. However, it interferes with resource sharing between
the scheduler and the rest of the system and complicates deployment and maintenance, limiting the potential reach of
the research [66].
GhOSt [32] aims to provide a general purpose deployable
solution for userspace schedulers in Linux. GhOSt uses an
upcall approach where scheduling policy decisions are made
by a userspace scheduler while the mechanism remains in
the kernel. GhOSt schedulers can be implemented in small
amounts of userspace code and redeployed easily, but each
scheduling decision requires scheduling the userspace scheduler. To hide latency, ghOSt uses an asynchronous model
where the kernel can continue to take interrupts and make
scheduling decisions while the userspace scheduler runs. This
means the scheduling decisions may be out of date.
Other kernel subsystems, particularly networking, can use
eBPF [26] for high velocity kernel development, and ghOSt
implemented support for scheduler eBPF hooks. Using eBPF,
users can load programs to customize kernel scheduler code,
provided that the structure of the scheduler does not change.
It is difficult to implement large or complicated code, such
as an entire scheduler, using eBPF. For example, the default
Linux scheduler, the Completely Fair Scheduler, is over 6,000
lines of code. Additionally, the eBPF trust model is not a good
match for scheduling. eBPF considers loaded programs potentially malicious and verifies that they will not disrupt kernel
execution. It is not clear how to implement this for scheduling since bad scheduling policy decisions can violate eBPF’s
safety requirements.
Previously, Bento [48] has shown that we can have high
development velocity and high performance for Linux kernel
file systems by writing file systems in safe Rust and supporting live upgrade and userspace debugging. However, Bento
sits behind the file page cache, reducing the cost of interposition. It is not clear if Bento’s design is low enough latency
for scheduling. Additionally, Bento does not address logical
correctness errors. In the file system, non-memory safety
correctness errors will generally affect only the applications
using the file system, while correctness errors in the scheduler
code can crash the kernel.

Inspired by Bento, we built a framework called Ekiben. The
goal of Ekiben is to enable high velocity development and deployment of high performance schedulers in the Linux kernel.
Ekiben schedulers are fast to write and debug and easy to test
with seamless resource sharing with the rest of the kernel.
Ekiben supports schedulers running in the Linux kernel for
wide deployability, but our approach is not restricted to the
Linux kernel. A new Ekiben scheduler is written in safe Rust
against a clean interface, making it less likely to introduce
bugs. Ekiben enables dynamic update of scheduling code in
a live kernel without rebooting, with a pause of only 10𝜇s.
Using a record and replay system, scheduling policies can
be debugged using userspace tools. Since Ekiben schedulers
are implemented in the kernel, they can coordinate easily
with other kernel schedulers, such as passing cores between
schedulers or applications.
We used Ekiben to implement several different scheduling
algorithms to demonstrate its flexibility in supporting a variety of scheduler designs and to understand the overhead and
performance of Ekiben compared to native implementations
of the same schedulers. We implemented a weighted fair queuing scheduler and evaluated it against Linux’s default scheduler CFS. Despite our scheduler being much simpler than CFS,
and including the Ekiben framework overhead, it achieves an
average of only 0.74% slowdown across 36 application benchmarks, with a maximum slowdown of 8.57%. We also implemented the Shinjuku [34] scheduler, a locality aware scheduler that co-locates tasks of the same user-defined class, and
the core arbiter from the Arachne multilevel thread scheduler.
The Ekiben Shinjuku and Arachne schedulers performed competitively with native implementations, and the locality aware
scheduler showed the potential to provide significant performance benefit. Two of the schedulers were implemented by
undergraduates with no prior Linux kernel programming
experience. The code will be made publicly available.

2

Nest [36] improves energy efficiency for jobs with fewer tasks
than cores by reusing warm cores rather than spreading tasks
across many cold cores. Because these schedulers do not need
to work well in all circumstances, they can potentially be
much smaller and simpler than CFS. Nevertheless, uptake
into Linux has been slow.
We propose Ekiben, a framework for high velocity development of Linux kernel schedulers. Ekiben’s trust model assumes that scheduler developers are trusted but clumsy; they
are not trying to break the kernel but may accidentally introduce bugs. Our overall goal is to allow non-expert programmers to be able to successfully design, implement, debug, and
deploy new schedulers.
There are several challenges to achieving high development
velocity for Linux kernel schedulers:
• Buggy code: The Linux kernel is a monolith of complicated C code, causing bugs to be common. The lack of
modularity in the Linux kernel and the potentially large
consequences of kernel bugs force developers to code
slowly and carefully. In Ekiben, we rely on safe language
features. By enabling schedulers implemented entirely
in safe Rust and by introducing a novel application of
the type system to check for scheduling correctness
errors, we eliminate whole classes of bugs without introducing significant performance overhead or overly
limiting scheduler designs.
• Limited interaction: Some scheduler designs, such as
two level schedulers that require coordination with user
threads, are difficult to implement in Linux because
they require interaction with the userspace tasks that
Linux does not support. By allowing generic, schedulerdefined interactions between the scheduler and userspace
tasks, Ekiben can support scheduler designs that cannot
be implemented in Linux today, such as those that require application specific hints or two level schedulers.
• Disruptive upgrade: Current Linux schedulers are compiled into the kernel source, so deploying a new scheduler requires recompiling the kernel and rebooting the
machine. Ekiben schedulers can be upgraded quickly,
without rebooting the machine and with only a short
period of service downtime.
• Slow debugging: The kernel does not have access to
debugging tools, such as those commonly used in userspace.
We support record and replay debugging in Ekiben. To
diagnose bugs not caught by the Ekiben framework,
developers can record the calls between the kernel and
the scheduler and replay later entirely at userspace.
• Resource sharing: Schedulers should be able to share
resources with the rest of the system. In Linux, different
applications can use different schedulers, sharing cores
and cycles between the schedulers. Ekiben schedulers
are implemented in the kernel to enable fine grained
core sharing across applications and schedulers.

Motivation and Approach

Linux includes three schedulers: a real time scheduler, an earliest deadline first scheduler, and the Completely Fair Scheduler
(CFS). CFS is the default and implements a version of weighted
fair queuing. These schedulers are all quite large and complex;
CFS is over 6000 lines of code, and even the simpler real time
and deadline schedulers are over 1500 lines of code. This complexity has led to a number of bugs, particularly performance
bugs due to a complicated load balancing mechanism [42].
Although CFS’s weighted fair queuing algorithm works
well for many of the tasks run on desktop or server machines.
Other schedulers can have advantages in some cases. With
more application knowledge, more optimal decisions are possible. For example, for workloads composed of many very
small tasks, shorter time slices can lower average job completion time [34]. Multilevel scheduling can give better performance isolation and flexibility by allowing applications
to define their own policies based on their workloads [62].
2

3

Ekiben

Ekiben’s threat model assumes that the developer is well
meaning and knowledgeable but makes occasional mistakes.
Ekiben aims to help this developer prevent these mistakes by
catching low-level errors that do not depend on the scheduler
behavior, such as NULL pointer dereferences and data races,
at compile time. Ekiben does not aim to prevent all bugs, and
bugs that depend on the scheduler’s semantic behavior can
remain uncaught. For example, schedulers implemented with
Ekiben can deadlock, lose tasks, and violate work conservation. We attempt to catch as many of these bugs as we can at
runtime, but cannot guarantee that all instances are caught.
Ekiben-C takes the interface defined by the core scheduler code and translates it into an interface based on message
passing. Like the core scheduler code, this is a synchronous
interface; it consists of function calls where the caller waits
for the the callee to return before progressing. It is not necessary for safety that the interface be based on message passing, but it helps enforce certain safety properties, such as no
shared pointers, preventing memory bugs across the interface. Ekiben-C handles direct interactions with kernel data
structures, such as pulling information like the runtime of
the task or the current CPU of the task. This information is
placed into per-function type "message" data structures that
are passed to the registered processing function in libEkiben.
The processing function in libEkiben parses each "message" to determine which scheduler function is being invoked
and handles the unsafety of interacting directly with C code
through the Rust FFI (Foreign Function Interface) layer. The
processing function pulls the fields from the "message" and
passes them to the scheduler function being called. If the function returns a value, libEkiben writes that value back into the
"message" data structure to return the value to Ekiben-C.
To enforce that the scheduler code implements the required
behavior, libEkiben provides a Rust trait for scheduler types.
This trait defines the functions that a scheduler module must
implement to be loadable as an Ekiben scheduler. A trait defines a set of functionality that a type must have to implement
the trait and can provide default implementations for shared
behavior on those types. Traits can be used as bounds on
function arguments, and any type that implements a trait can
be used where the trait is called for.
The EkibenScheduler trait (shown in Table 1) specifies the
functions that a scheduler should provide. Most of these functions are very similar to the functions defined by the core
scheduling code to implement a Linux scheduler, with some
notable differences.
The core function for a scheduler is pick_next_task which
tells the core kernel scheduler code which task should be run
next. Other important functions are task_new, task_wakeup
and similar functions for tracking task state, migrate_task_rq
for moving tasks between cores, balance for telling the core
scheduler to move tasks to rebalance load, and error functions
to return error values from the kernel. While these functions
are modeled after the Linux scheduler interface they could be

The high level overview of Ekiben is shown in Figure 1. Ekiben is composed of two major components, Ekiben-C and
libEkiben.
Part of Ekiben, Ekiben-C is implemented in C and compiled into the Linux kernel. It interfaces directly with the core
scheduling code and the kernel scheduling data structures.
Ekiben-C handles registering, deregistering, and upgrading
schedulers and sets up and manages infrastructure for communication channels between userspace and the kernel scheduler
and the record and replay system. It handles the unsafe work
that is required for scheduling on behalf of Ekiben schedulers,
such as performing state updates to kernel task_struct data
structure, managing interactions with the kernel run-queues
when adding or moving tasks, and manipulating raw pointers to read and pass data to the scheduler module. Ekiben-C
also translates the calls from the core scheduling code into
calls that the scheduler can implement safely by ensuring
that all data passed to the scheduler can be safely accessed.
Ekiben schedulers do not directly manipulate kernel state or
run-queues.
The other component, libEkiben, is a Rust library that is
compiled with the scheduler code into a module that is dynamically loaded into the kernel. This library provides safe
interfaces so the scheduler code can access the kernel and
implements functions for loading and managing the scheduler. It contains some unsafe Rust because it must handle
interactions with the C code in Ekiben-C, which is inherently
unsafe. Each scheduler is written entirely in safe Rust and
only needs to provide the logic for the scheduling algorithm.
The scheduler module is not sandboxed further; once it is
loaded into the kernel, it runs like any other kernel code.
When the scheduler module is loaded, libEkiben calls EkibenC to register the newly available scheduler. This registers the
ID of the scheduler being loaded and a processing function
in libEkiben for parsing calls from Ekiben. User tasks can
switch to using the new scheduler using its defined ID value.
During regular operation, Ekiben-C processes calls from the
core scheduler code for these tasks, forwarding the calls to
the processing function in libEkiben and managing updates
to kernel data structures, such as the CPU’s run queue. When
the module is unloaded, libEkiben similarly unregisters the
scheduler with Ekiben-C, and no new tasks can be attached
to the scheduler.
3.1 Safe Interfaces
Ekiben provides schedulers with safe interfaces, both the interface that schedulers are required to implement and the
interfaces for schedulers to access kernel functionality, such
as locks and timers. With safe interfaces, Ekiben schedulers
can be implemented entirely in safe Rust, preventing whole
classes of bugs and reducing time spent debugging new schedulers. Ekiben-C and libEkiben work together to provide safe
interfaces for the scheduler code.
3

head

User

tail

Kernel

Ekiben-C

Scheduler Module

sched

pick_next_task

Scheduler

reregister_prep
reregister_init

sched core
Upgrade
dispatch

libEkiben

RwLock

Manager

spin_lock

Figure 1. A high level diagram Ekiben. Ekiben-C is written in C and compiled into the kernel. It interacts with libEkiben, a
Rust library that is compiled with the scheduler code into the dynamically loaded scheduler module. The black lines represent
code pathways during normal execution. Red lines represent module insertion and upgrade.
API Function
Description
pick_next_task
Pick the next task for the CPU.
pnt_err
Could not schedule chosen task.
task_new
There is a new task.
task_wakeup
A task woke up.
task_blocked
A task blocked.
A task died.
task_dead
task_tick
A timer has triggered.
select_task_rq
Choose the CPU for a task.
migrate_task_rq
A task is moving CPUs.
balance
Rebalance tasks onto CPU.
balance_err
Could not move the chosen task.
Register a user to kernel hint queue.
register_queue
enter_queue
Check the user hint queue.
unregister_queue Unregister the user to kernel queue.
parse_hint
Synchronously parse hint.
reregister_prep
Prepare to be unloaded in upgrade.
reregister_init
Initialize in upgrade.
Table 1. A selection of the API of the EkibenScheduler Trait.
This is the API that a scheduler module should implement
to be loadable as an Ekiben scheduler.

bug, we introduce a new type called Schedulable that represents a task and what core it can safely be scheduled on. When
tasks are created, blocked or unblocked, or moved between
run-queues, libEkiben creates a Schedulable data structure
to indicate which core’s run-queue the task is on and passes
ownership of it to the scheduler at the corresponding call. The
scheduler returns the data structure back to Ekiben as the
return value for pick_next_task as proof that the task can
be safely scheduled on the core. In libEkiben, the core in the
Schedulable is checked against the core being assigned, and
if the check fails, the data structure’s ownership is returned
to the scheduler using the pnt_err call. A Schedulable also
cannot be copied or cloned, so the scheduler cannot hold onto
an old Schedulable to act as validation after it has returned
it to Ekiben when moving or running the task. The scheduler
must instead receive a new Schedulable, such as through the
task_wakeup call or as the current task in pick_next_task.
Ekiben cannot always prevent the scheduler from holding onto an invalid Schedulable. The migrate_task_rq
function, which moves tasks between cores, passes in a new
Schedulable for the new core and requires the scheduler to
return the old one so the scheduler will only have validation
to run the task on one core. We cannot check at compile time
that the scheduler returns the correct Schedulable for the
old core, so it is possible for a scheduler to keep the wrong
data structure. Additionally, we cannot require that the scheduler return a Schedulable in task_blocked or task_dead
because these functions are sometimes called when the task
is not schedulable and the scheduler has nothing to return.
In libEkiben, we also provide a safe interface for receiving
hints from userspace (subsection 3.3).
3.2 Live Upgrade
We support live upgrade of schedulers in Ekiben. Live upgrade
allows an upgraded version of a scheduler to replace an older
version of the same scheduler without rebooting the machine

adapted to a different operating system. An Ekiben scheduler
is only expected to manage its own state in response to these
calls; the kernel’s core scheduling code decides when to call
each function and Ekiben-C manages kernel state.
In Linux, schedulers are expected to track their tasks’ runtimes using kernel timing functions. In our system, Ekiben-C
tracks the runtime of tasks on behalf of the scheduler and
passes this to the scheduler when the task state changes, such
as blocking, waking, and yielding, and to pick_next_task.
Ekiben records this information for deterministic replay.
The pick_next_task function in Linux expects the scheduler to choose a task on the CPU’s run-queue, and if this
expectation is violated, the kernel can crash. To prevent this
4

3.3 Custom Scheduler Hints
Correct scheduling decisions often depend on the behavior of
the workload being scheduled. Tasks that communicate with
each other or operate on the same data benefit from being
scheduled on the same NUMA node, or with more recent split
last level cache architectures, on cores with the same last level
cache [53]. On a heterogeneous CPU, some tasks might prefer
to be scheduled on certain cores or devices or co-located with
other tasks [54].
In addition to sending scheduling hints from userspace
to the kernel, it can also be useful for information to flow
from the kernel to userspace. For example, in scheduler activations [4], the scheduler provides information about scheduling events to the user-level thread scheduler, such as when
cores become available or when user tasks block in the kernel. Another example could be to utilize machine learning to
improve scheduling decisions [29].
Ekiben supports custom scheduler-defined hints, both from
userspace to the kernel and vice versa. Each scheduler that
supports hints defines data structures indicating the type of
hints that it expects to receive and the type of hints it will send
to the user. We enforce that these types can be read-shared
across the user/kernel boundary without violating memory
safety, but otherwise put no restrictions on them.
Queues can be shared across a live upgrade as long as both
versions of the scheduler use the same hint data structures.
The scheduler passes the queues as part of the shared state
during the upgrade. If the next scheduler version will use
different hints, old queues must be closed before the upgrade,
and new ones can be created after.
3.4 Record and Replay
Kernel debugging is notoriously difficult. Many debugging
tools are difficult or even impossible to use on the kernel.
While Ekiben prevents many bugs that would crash the kernel, logic bugs can still exist in the schedulers. We want to
provide a mechanism to simplify debugging by allowing the
scheduler code to be run and debugged at userspace.
To this end, Ekiben implements a record and replay system
for scheduling events. When running in record mode, libEkiben records each call and hint sent to the scheduler. The replay
system implements a replacement version of libEkiben to replay these records to the scheduler, now running in userspace.
The exact same scheduler code is run during both record and
replay. The replay is primarily aimed at understanding the
behavior of the recorded scheduler. The trace could be used as
input to a modified scheduler, but the policy changes may affect the order of scheduler actions and the scheduler behavior.
Consulting a userspace scheduler synchronously on every
operation, like Bento’s approach to file system debugging,
is infeasible because the scheduler subsystem cannot block
waiting for a response from a userspace program that itself
needs to be scheduled to run. Likewise, consulting a userspace
scheduler asynchronously, as in ghOSt, can result in different
behavior between the kernel and user versions.

or killing any of the tasks using the scheduler. Because the
scheduling code is running throughout the upgrade, we must
ensure that any state maintained by the scheduler, such as
task runtimes and which task is runnable on which core, remains consistent across the upgrade and is available to the
new scheduler after the upgrade.
We ensure consistency of the state by quiescing the scheduler module during the upgrade. Since the scheduler module is only invoked from Ekiben-C, we know that the state
of the scheduler will remain consistent as long as all calls
from Ekiben-C are completed before the upgrade begins and
any new calls wait until the upgrade is completed. We implement this using a simple per-scheduler read-write lock.
Non-upgrade calls into the scheduler module acquire the lock
in read mode, allowing multiple concurrent calls into the
scheduler module. When an upgrade begins, the lock is acquired in write mode, preventing any of the non-upgrade calls
from entering the scheduler module. When the upgrade is
finished, the lock is released, and the non-upgrade calls can
proceed, now directed to the new version of the scheduler.
After the scheduler module is quiesced, Ekiben-C calls into
reregister_prep, informing the scheduler that an upgrade
is occurring. The module then performs any necessary maintenance and returns a data structure with any state it wishes
to pass to the new version of the scheduler. Ekiben-C then
calls reregister_init in the new version of the scheduler,
passing the data structure returned from the old scheduler.
The new scheduler can then initialize itself based on the provided state, claiming ownership of some or all of the state
if it wishes. Because Ekiben-C acquired the read-write lock
described above in write mode, we know that no other calls
can enter either scheduler module during the upgrade, and
it is safe for the scheduler to manipulate its internal state.
After ensuring that state remains consistent across the
scheduler during an upgrade, the rest of the upgrade is fairly
straightforward. Ekiben-C swaps pointers so that its internal
data structure now points to the new module, and the upgrade
completes. Calls to the scheduler will use the new pointer, and
so will call into the new scheduler module. The old scheduler
module can then be safely unloaded.
Limitations. Because we quiesce the scheduler during an
upgrade, there is a period when the scheduler is blocked and
cannot accept non-upgrade calls, leading to a short service
blackout. Ekiben trusts the scheduler to have short, welldefined code paths so the read locks will be given up quickly
and the upgrade can progress. We also trust the scheduler to
upgrade and release the write lock quickly. Another limitation is that the state data structure that the new scheduler
expects must be the same as the data structure exported by
the old scheduler because the memory is passed directly. This
data structure is otherwise completely custom, and the new
scheduler can export a different data structure to the next
scheduler upgrade.
5

Record. LibEkiben must record the sequence of information provided to the scheduler, both procedure calls into the
scheduler and hints from the queue, so they can be replayed
exactly as they were originally played in the kernel. We also
record responses returned by the scheduler so we can alert the
user if the scheduler returns a different result during replay.
We do not record or attempt to replay the exact timing of the
messages. Where timing is relevant to scheduler decisions,
such as the runtime of a task, that information is provided
in the message from the kernel and so will be recorded. We
assume that the scheduler does not attempt to validate this
information or track its own timing.
Ekiben’s record and replay system must also handle concurrency. The Linux kernel is multi-threaded, and multiple
kernel threads can call into an Ekiben scheduler at once, e.g.
on different cores. Due to Rust’s properties and Ekiben’s structure, we know that potential race conditions are protected by
locks, and we can identify and record the order of lock acquisitions. As long as locks are acquired in the same order during
record and replay and the behavior of the scheduler is deterministic, the results should be the same [30]. In libEkiben, we
include recording functionality in the shim wrappers around
the kernel lock functions to record lock creation, acquisition
and release, along with the address of the lock and the ID of
the accessing kernel thread. All other message records are
also tagged by the thread ID of the kernel thread calling into
the scheduler.
Recording messages in the scheduler stack is non-trivial. In
many cases, Ekiben is called while the kernel has interrupts
disabled. Writing to a file has the potential to sleep, so we
cannot write the messages to a log file while in the scheduler
context. Even printing to the kernel log must be delayed until
out of the scheduler context.
Similarly to userspace hints, we use a ring buffer to solve
this. We run a separate userspace task that creates a ring buffer
queue shared with Ekiben-C. When libEkiben wants to record
a message, it sends it to Ekiben-C, which adds the message
to the queue. The userspace task consumes messages on the
queue and writes them to a file. If the buffer overruns, events
may be dropped.
In order to record messages, the userspace record task must
be running and the scheduler must have been compiled in
record mode. By default, libEkiben does not record messages.
Replay. Replay consumes the file created during recording. The replay utility sends the recorded messages directly
to the scheduler code in the same order they were called and
validates the responses against the recorded ones.
To handle concurrent replay, we ensure that all locks are acquired in the same order in replay as they were during record.
First, the replay system analyzes the log and parses out the
lists of operations on each lock, using the lock’s memory address to differentiate the locks. The locks are then created,
passing in the list of acquisitions for each lock. We assume

Component
Lang. LOC Unsafe LOC
Ekiben-C
C
2411
N/A
Scheduler libEkiben Rust
962
94
Rust
5870
2858
Other libEkiben
Userspace Record
Rust
95
10
Replay
Rust
646
0
Table 2. Lines of code for the Ekiben components. The
scheduler libEkiben includes the EkibenScheduler trait,
hint queues, and support for record and live upgrade. Other
libEkiben provides safe access to kernel data structures and
functions. Part of Other libEkiben is borrowed from the
analogous library from Bento (libBentoKS).
that locks are created in the same order during replay as they
were during record and are not deallocated.
To allow for concurrent operations, the replay system starts
a thread per recorded message in the record log as it replays
the log. When each replay thread is created, the replay system
names it with the ID of the associated kernel thread. When
the replay thread attempts to acquire a lock, the lock checks
whether it is the next to acquire the lock. If not, the thread is
blocked until its turn.
Ekiben does not support upgrading the scheduler during
the record and replay process.

4

Implementation

4.1 Ekiben
The lines of code for Ekiben are shown in Table 2. Ekiben is
implemented in Linux 5.11 and is based on the kernel component from ghOSt [32]. The scheduler libEkiben includes the
EkibenScheduler trait, hint queues, and support for record
and live upgrade. Other libEkiben provides safe access to kernel data structures and functions and general support for Rust
kernel programming.
4.2 Schedulers
To demonstrate Ekiben’s flexibility, we implemented a selection of schedulers: a weighted fair queuing scheduler based
on Linux CFS, a specialized research scheduler based on Shinjuku, and schedulers that utilize the userspace hinting and
bidirectional communication features of Ekiben for locality
aware scheduling and two level scheduling. As baselines, we
use the default Linux CFS and the ghOSt [32]
4.2.1 CFS and Weighted Fair Queuing. CFS uses per-core
run-queues, meaning it first assigns tasks to cores, and then
chooses the next task for the core from among the assigned
tasks. On each core, CFS implements a version of weighted fair
queuing, dividing CPU time proportionally between groups
of tasks, and then within each group, while respecting priority. It uses a calculation called vruntime to track which
group/task to choose next, choosing the group/task with the
lowest weighted accumulated runtime. The vruntime is calculated based on the task’s runtime, modified by its priority;
tasks with higher priority accrue vruntime slower. To prevent
sleeping tasks from accruing a large vruntime debt and therefore running for too long after they wake, newly woken tasks
6

receive the maximum of their old vruntime and the vruntime
of the task with the lowest vruntime in the run-queue minus
a several millisecond threshold. If a newly woken task has a
smaller vruntime than the current task, it preempts the current task when a system timer ticks. Otherwise, task switches
occur only after a task has run for its allocated time slice. In
order to prevent starvation, CFS attempts to run every task
at least once per time period, where the period depends on
the number of tasks, with a minimum of 6ms. When tasks are
created or woken, the length of the period adjusts to include
the new task. New tasks are run at the end of the period, but
recently woken tasks can be run earlier.
CFS places running tasks onto cores and moves tasks between cores to achieve better performance. By default, CFS
will attempt to even out the amount of work per core, based
on information such as the amount of time the core is idle or
overloaded, the priority of the tasks on the core, the capacity
of the cores on the machine, and the preferences of the tasks.
In certain cases, CFS will co-locate tasks on specific cores,
such as if it is required to by the user. CFS attempts to place
tasks so that newly woken tasks can be scheduled promptly.
When a task is woken or a core becomes idle, CFS will move
tasks so the newly idle cores are used. CFS rebalances task
placement every 1-10ms, depending on the configuration, or
when cores become newly idle. CFS first tries to move tasks to
cores within the same NUMA node, and will not balance tasks
across NUMA nodes unless there are more than a threshold
more tasks running on the busier NUMA node.

a separate core. We also implement a version of the Shinjuku [34] scheduler and evaluate it against ghOSt’s version
of the same scheduler.
The Shinjuku scheduler [34] achieves low latency for workloads with short, high priority tasks and longer, low priority
tasks with an efficient version of shortest task first. Shinjuku
uses centralized first-come-first-serve scheduling. After each
task has run for 5 to 15𝜇s Shinjuku preempts it, placing it at
the back of the queue. However, Shinjuku does not run in
Linux, instead depending on the Dune [12] operating system.
Unlike Linux, Dune applies a single scheduling algorithm for
all tasks on the machine.
To evaluate Ekiben’s ability to support a specialized scheduler for Shinjuku-style workloads, we implemented a scheduler based on the Shinjuku scheduler using Ekiben. Our scheduler implements an approximation of a first-come-first-serve
queue of tasks with fast preemption across the multiple kernel run-queues. Our preemption slice is 10𝜇s instead of 5𝜇s
to prevent overloading the scheduler. This scheduler was
implemented in 285 lines of code.
4.2.3 Locality Aware Scheduler. We also implemented
a locality aware scheduler using Ekiben that co-locates tasks
that communicate heavily with each other or benefit from
cache sharing. This scheduler uses Ekiben’s userspace hinting mechanism to inform the scheduler about which tasks to
co-locate. The application sends the ID of each newly created
thread and a locality value to indicate which tasks should
be co-located. Unlike Linux’s taskset cgroup, these hints do
not need to specify the core for each task, only its colocation,
which the scheduler can ignore if non-optimal, such as when
there are too many tasks on a given core. This scheduler was
implemented in 203 lines.
4.2.4 Two-level Scheduler. The Arachne user-level scheduler provides two-level thread management: applications request cores and manage user-level threads on the assigned
cores [4, 62].
In Arachne, both the core arbiter and the runtime are implemented in userspace. The core arbiter relies on Linux’s
cpuset mechanism to manage core assignments. The runtime
sends messages to the core arbiter over a socket, and the core
arbiter either responds on the socket or uses a shared memory
page. This socket allows the runtime to manually block if a
core is not available.
We reimplemented the Arachne core arbiter as a kernel
scheduler using Ekiben. This scheduler uses Ekiben’s bidirectional userspace hints. We use the user-to-kernel queue
to send core requests to the Ekiben core arbiter; we use the
kernel-to-userspace queue for core reclamation requests. The
Ekiben core arbiter executes the same decisions as the Arachne
core arbiter, but uses standard kernel scheduling mechanisms
for assigning, moving, and blocking user scheduler activations
rather than relying on cpuset and sockets. The Ekiben version
of the core arbiter is implemented in 579 lines of code. We compare this scheduler against both CFS and unmodified Arachne.

Ekiben Weighted Fair Queuing. To evaluate the overhead
of Ekiben, we implemented our own scheduler based on CFS.
Our version does not provide the full complexity of the algorithm; instead, we are interested in showing the overhead
of our approach on benchmarks relative to CFS. We compute vruntime for per-core time slices but use a much simpler
method for determining task placement. If a core is about to
become idle and another core had a waiting task, our scheduler steals waiting work from the core with the longest queue
of tasks. Otherwise, our scheduler does not rebalance tasks.
We found this compromise allowed our scheduler to achieve
good performance on a wide array of benchmarks with much
less complexity - 646 lines of code versus 6247 for CFS.
4.2.2 GhOSt and the Shinjuku Scheduler. GhOSt [32]
is a research framework for userspace schedulers. GhOSt
implements a trampoline approach; calls from the core scheduler code are forwarded to the userspace scheduler, which
sends its scheduling decisions to the kernel. GhOSt uses an
asynchronous message passing model, i.e. the core scheduler
code does not wait for the userspace scheduler to respond
before choosing what to run. We evaluate microbenchmarks
against two ghOSt schedulers, the per-CPU FIFO scheduler,
which runs per-core schedulers that manage tasks assigned
to that core, and the SOL scheduler, a latency-optimized FIFO
scheduler that manages all cores, running the scheduler on
7

5

Evaluation

tested configurations use 2 message threads and 2 or 40 worker
threads, resulting in a maximum of 80 worker threads, the
same as the number of cores on the machine. When the number of worker threads is larger than the number of cores, the
scheduling latency is influenced by waiting time more than
scheduler performance. We use a 5s warmup time for each run.
The results are shown in Table 4. CFS and the Ekiben WFQ
scheduler showed similar results except for the median with
40 threads. The Ekiben version of Arachne has lower latency
than the other schedulers because of its userspace mechanisms for blocking and waking threads.
5.3 WFQ Scheduler Applications
To evaluate whether our WFQ scheduler performs competitively with CFS, we ran multithreaded application benchmarks using benchmark suites that covered a wide range of
use case patterns. We ran benchmarks from the NAS Parallel Benchmark suite [7] and the Phoronix Multi-core Test
Suite [59]. The NAS Parallel Benchmark suite from NASA is a
set of benchmarks to evaluate parallel performance on supercomputers. We ran nine of the ten NAS Benchmarks, excluding the DC benchmark that targets computational grids. We
used the "C" benchmark size, the largest standard benchmark
size. The Phoronix Multi-Core Test Suite contains a very large
collection of multithreaded application benchmarks. There
are over 90 applications, and many have multiple workloads.
We report the same collection of 27 benchmarks as reported in
Nest [36]. Phoronix runs each benchmark three times unless
the standard deviation is greater than 5%, in which case it
will rerun the benchmark until the standard deviation is low
enough, up to a maximum of 15 times. The results for both
benchmark suites are in Table 5.
The NAS benchmarks show very little performance difference between the CFS and Ekiben WFQ schedulers, with a
maximum of 2.16% difference on the LU benchmark. The NAS
benchmarks all start one task per core, so this is expected behavior. Performance on the Phoronix benchmarks is also quite
similar for both schedulers across the benchmarks. The largest
slowdowns were 8.22% and 8.57% on the Cassandra Writes
benchmark, which issued writes to an Apache Cassandra database, and the Zstandard compression benchmark using compression level 3, long mode, respectively. This was likely due to
the WFQ scheduler’s simpler mechanism for rebalacing tasks
making less optimal decisions for these benchmarks. Interestingly, we also saw speedup for Ekiben on some benchmarks.
Overall, the geometric mean of the performance differences
between the schedulers across the benchmarks was 0.74%.
We also ran these benchmarks on ghOSt. The SOL minimal
FIFO scheduler described in the ghOSt paper is much slower
and does not run some of the benchmarks. A new ghOSt-based
weighted fair queueing scheduler is in progress, and runs correctly on all but one benchmark. It is slower on most benchmarks than Ekiben. However, since it is not finished, a quantitative comparison would not be fair to ghOSt at this time.

In our evaluation, we test Ekiben’s ability to meet our goal
of high velocity development for a wide variety of high performance schedulers with minimal runtime overhead. In section 6, we discuss the development experience of Ekiben. In
this section, we evaluate the performance of the baseline and
Ekiben schedulers. We evaluate whether these schedulers
can achieve equivalent performance to native implementations on microbenchmarks and application workloads. For
research schedulers, we evaluate the scheduler against using
benchmarks from the original paper.
5.1 Setting
Benchmarks were performed on either an 8 core, one-socket
machine with an Intel i7-9700 CPU running at 3.00GHz or (for
scalability tests) an 80 core, two-socket machine with Intel
Xeon Gold 6138 CPUs running at 2.00GHz.
5.2 Microbenchmarks
We used microbenchmarks to evaluate the latency and scalability imposed by the Ekiben framework. We ran the same
microbenchmarks on all the schedulers we implemented.
Latency. Table 3 shows the results of the perf bench
sched pipe benchmark, averaged over three runs of the
benchmark. This benchmark starts two tasks that send 1 million messages back and forth using the pipe system call. After
each message, the sending task sleeps until the other task responds. By default, all schedulers put the two tasks on different
cores. We also ran the benchmarks forcing both tasks to be
on the same core.
Compared to CFS, our Ekiben WFQ scheduler adds 0.4𝜇s
(0.6𝜇s) of latency per message, for the two (one) core case.
This represents a 12% to 20% overhead on this benchmark.
This overhead could possibly be reduced with further optimization. Our version of the Shinjuku scheduler has slightly
higher overhead because it starts a reschedule timer on every operation, while CFS and our WFQ scheduler only start
a reschedule timer when multiple tasks are present. The locality aware scheduler is slightly faster because it is simpler.
The Ekiben version of Arachne is much faster than the others
because it uses userspace threads instead of processes for
blocking and waking threads.
The GhOSt schedulers perform significantly worse than
both CFS and Ekiben. The per-CPU FIFO scheduler performs
worse when both tasks are placed on the same core because
they are sharing the core with the ghOSt userspace scheduler. On every schedule operation, the scheduler first must
be scheduled and run on the core.
Scalability. To measure the scalability of Ekiben, we evaluate the tail latency of task schedules when there are a large
number of tasks using the schbench benchmark. This benchmark starts a number of message threads and worker threads.
Each message thread and its worker threads send messages
back and forth. Schbench reports the median and 99% tail
latency of task schedules throughout the benchmark. The
8

Message Latency (𝜇s) CFS GhOSt SOL GhOSt FIFO WFQ Shinjuku Locality Arachne
One Core
3.0
6.0
9.1
3.6
4.0
3.5
0.1
Two Cores
3.6
5.8
7.0
4.0
4.4
3.9
0.2
Table 3. Scheduler latency for the perf bench sched pipe benchmark in 𝜇s per wakeup. Ekiben adds around 0.6𝜇s of latency
over CFS in the worst case and outperforms the ghOSt schedulers due to the synchronous nature of the benchmark.
Worker Threads
CFS GhOSt SOL GhOSt FIFO WFQ Shinjuku Locality Arachne
2 Tasks (𝜇s)
50th 74
66
101
78
79
80
1
99th 101
132
170
104
109
105
1
40 Tasks (𝜇s) 50th 139
192
152
170
168
175
1
99th 320
1354
1806
323
307
324
1
Table 4. Schbench benchmark with two message threads and 2 and 40 worker threads per message thread. Thread wakeup
latencies are measured in 𝜇s.
cycles between the RocksDB workers and the batch applica5.4 Shinjuku Scheduler
To evaluate our version of the Shinjuku scheduler, we ran the
tion according to their niceness values. When there are no
RocksDB benchmarks used in the Shinjuku and ghOSt papers.
RocksDB requests the Ekiben scheduler seamlessly cedes cyThese benchmarks send queries to an in-memory RocksDB
cles to CFS to run the batch application. The ghOSt Shinjuku
database, with 99.5% GET requests and 0.5% range queries.
scheduler provides substantially less CPU time to the batch
Replicating how this benchmark was run in ghOSt, each GET
application because it must pay the overhead of the userspace
is assigned to take 4𝜇s and each range query to take 10ms. If
scheduler. In Ekiben and CFS, the scheduler is run on the same
RocksDB responds too quickly, the benchmark spins until the
core as the application as part of regular kernel calls. All of
assigned time has elapsed. Three cores were reserved, one
the schedulers give the batch task a much higher CPU share
for background tasks, one for the load generator, and one
than the original Shinjuku scheduler would [32].
5.5 Locality Aware Scheduler
for the scheduler if required. The load generator passes tasks
to a total of 50 workers running on the other five cores. We
To evaluate the effectiveness of using hints in our locality
evaluate against the ghOSt version of the Shinjuku scheduler.
aware scheduler, we used a modified version of the schbench
We could not compare against the original Shinjuku scheduler
benchmark. This benchmark starts a specified number of mesbecause it requires a specific NIC that we do not have. Both
sage threads and worker threads. Each message thread and
the ghOSt Shinjuku and Ekiben Shinjuku schedulers use a
its worker threads send messages back and forth. The benchpreemption timer of 10𝜇s. The results are shown in Figure 2.
mark records the wakeup latency of the worker threads to
In the first benchmark, shown in Figure 2a, only the RocksDB
evaluate scheduler overhead. When a message thread and
application is run. Note that the y-axis is in log scale. Both
its worker threads are on the same core, wakeup latency can
he Ekiben and ghOSt Shinjuku schedulers achieve low tail
be very low. However, the benchmark uses a futex to wait
latency at high loads due to the short preemption timer; long
which does not set the WF_SYNC flag when waking the workrunning range query tasks are preempted quickly, allowing
ers, so Linux can not detect this pattern [53]. In our modified
the short GET queries to run. On CFS, tasks run for much
version of the benchmark, we send hints to an Ekiben locallonger before being preempted, by default 750𝜇s, so the GET
ity aware scheduler to co-locate the message thread with its
queries spent more time waiting to be run.
workers, but place each set of message and worker threads
In the second benchmark, a batch application was co-located
on a different core. We compare this approach to CFS and
with RocksDB. For the CFS and Ekiben tests, the batch apto the locality aware scheduler with random placement (no
plication was run using CFS. RocksDB is given a priority of
hints) as baselines. We also compare to CFS using cgroups to
-20 while the batch application is 19 (lower is higher priority).
test if the flexibility provided by the hints is necessary for a
The batch application is run on ghOSt using a lower priority
performance benefit. Cgroups enable specifying a set of cores
than RocksDB. Figure 2b shows the tail latency of RocksDB,
that a process should run on, but do not support different sets
and Figure 2c shows the CPU share of the batch application.
of cores for different threads within the same process. We use
Both the Ekiben and ghOSt Shinjuku schedulers achieve
cgroups to place all the threads on one core.
similar tail latency as with no background task because they
The results are shown in Table 6. We use two message
give priority to the RocksDB workers, with a small time slice.
threads and two worker threads per message thread. CFS and
The tail latency on CFS worsens with addition of the batch
the locality aware scheduler with random placement perform
task.
similarly because both spread tasks across cores. The locality
The batch application receives a similar share of the CPU
aware scheduler with hints achieves significantly lower 99%
on CFS and the Ekiben Shinjuku scheduler. CFS itself shares
latency. Using cgroups to put all threads on one core improves

9

104

103
10

2

101
10

0

20
40
60
80
RocksDB Throughput (1K req/s)

6
5

103
10

Batch CPUs

CFS
ghOSt-Shinjuku
Ekiben-Shinjuku

99% Latency (µs)

99% Latency (µs)

104

2

101

4
3
2
1

10

0

20
40
60
80
RocksDB Throughput (1K req/s)

0

20
40
60
RocksDB Throughput (1K req/s)

80

99% Latency (µs)

(a) Tail latency for a dispersive load on
(b) Tail latency for a dispersive load on
(c) CPU share for a batch application
RocksDB.
RocksDB co-located with a batch app.
co-located with RocksDB.
Figure 2. Comparison of the Ekiben Shinjuku (𝜇s scale preemption) scheduler compared to CFS and the ghOSt Shinjuku
scheduler using RocksDB with and without a batch application. Latency graphs are in log scale.
5.7 Live Upgrade
3000
We evaluate the performance impact of live upgrade using
CFS
2500
the schbench benchmark and timing instrumentation in the
Arachne
kernel. We track the tail latency of schedule operations beEkiben-Arachne
2000
fore, during, and after the upgrade. The upgrade interruption
1500
was too short to affect the tail latency of the schbench operations, so we repeated the evaluation with timing calls inserted
1000
in the kernel. We evaluate this benchmark on both the one
500
socket machine using 2 message threads and 2 workers per
0
message thread and the two socket machine with 2 message
100
200
300
threads and both 2 and 40 workers per message thread. On
Memcached Throughput (1K req/s)
the one socket machine, the upgrade takes 1.5𝜇s. On the two
socket machine, the upgrade takes 9.9𝜇s and 10.1𝜇s for 2 and
Figure 3. Tail latency of requests to a Memcached server
40
workers, respectively. All were averaged over three runs.
using Mutilate comparing baseline Memcached using CFS
5.8
Record and Replay
to a version using Arachne and a version using Arachne
We
evaluate
the performance of record and replay using the
modified to use an Ekiben core arbiter.
perf bench sched pipe benchmark on the WFQ scheduler.
This benchmark completes in around 4 seconds during regular operation. During record, the benchmark completes in
median latency at a cost of much worse tail latency due to the
around 30 seconds, and the replay takes around 3 minutes.
added competition between threads.
Record is slower than regular operation because all relevant
5.6 Arachne Scheduler
operations must be sent to the record program, which writes
We evaluate the Ekiben version of the Arachne scheduling
a file asynchronously on a different core.
using a version of the Realistic memcached workload from
During replay, the first 30 seconds are spent reading the file
the Arachne paper [62]. We use the Mutilate benchmark utiland
parsing lock operations. The rest is due to the mechanism
ity [49] to generate load for the memcached server, using
for
ensuring
concurrent operations occur in the same order
the key size and distribution, value size and distribution, and
as
the
live
execution.
This benchmark has many calls to the
inter-arrival distribution of the Facebook ETC workload [6], 1
scheduler.
In
the
kernel,
these operations are very fast. During
million records, and 3% updates. Four clients are used to generreplay,
if
threads
arrives
in a different order than what was
ate load, enough to make the benchmark server-bound in our
recorded, we need to block the thread and wake it up later to
tests. Each client creates 16 threads and four connections per
try again. These constant sleeps and wakes add latency and
thread. An extra client is used to evaluate latency. We compare
account for most of the execution time during replay.
the Ekiben version of Arachne against the original Arachne
code and a baseline version of memcached running on CFS.
6 Discussion
Both of the Arachne versions automatically scale between
In this section, we report on our experience using Ekiben to
two and seven cores, reserving one for background tasks. The
develop kernel schedulers. Ekiben’s design made scheduler
baseline version uses all eight cores on the machine.
development much more straightforward than it would be
The Ekiben version of Arachne achieves similar perforin Linux. In fact, two of the schedulers (the Shinjuku and
mance to the original Arachne scheduler, better than CFS at
Locality Aware schedulers) were written by undergraduates
high load.
10

Benchmark
CFS
WFQ
NAS Benchmarks
BT (total Mops/s)
26669.1
26682.3 −0.05 %
4535.8
4475.7
1.32 %
CG (total Mops/s)
EP (total Mops/s)
487.9
491.9 −0.83 %
FT (total Mops/s)
14886.8
14716.5
1.14 %
1297.4
1284.9
0.96 %
IS (total Mops/s)
LU (total Mops/s)
30469.4
29811.4
2.16 %
8601.4
8535.9
0.76 %
MG (total Mops/s)
SP (total Mops/s)
11797.0
11705.6
0.78 %
73.8
73.1
0.87 %
UA (total Mops/s)
Phoronix Multicore
Arrayfire, 1 (GFLOPS)
812.98
820.29 −0.90 %
Arrayfire, 2 (ms)
26.72
26.71 −0.04 %
Cassandra, 1 (Op/s)
55100
50573
8.22 %
161.46
161.12
0.22 %
ASKAP, 4 (Iter/s)
Cpuminer, 2 (kH/s)
51363
51390
−0.05 %
Cpuminer, 3 (kH/s)
35667
35390
0.78 %
9499.87
9494.90
0.05 %
Cpuminer, 4 (kH/s)
Cpuminer, 6 (kH/s)
258100
261667
−1.38 %
Cpuminer, 11 (kH/s)
29400
29323
0.26 %
Ffmpeg, 1, 1 (s)
23.98
24.73
3.13 %
Graphics-Magick, 4
781
779
0.26 %
(Iter/m)
OIDN, 1 (Images/s)
0.31
0.30
3.23 %
OIDN, 2 (Images/s)
0.31
0.30
3.23 %
OIDN, 3 (Images/s)
0.15
0.15
0
%
Rodina, 3 (s)
159.32
160.00
0.43 %
Zstd, 2 (MB/s)
856.1
782.7
8.57 %
153.1
165.4 −8.03 %
Zstd, 4 (MB/s)
AVIFEnc, 4 (s)
14.94
15.33
2.62 %
Libgav1, 1 (FPS)
262.95
261.21
0.66 %
Libgav1, 2 (FPS)
67.28
66.58
1.04 %
Libgav1, 3 (FPS)
222.70
216.51
2.78 %
Libgav1, 4 (FPS)
64.10
63.54
0.87 %
OneDNN, 4, 1 (ms)
4.26
4.18 −1.85 %
OneDNN, 5, 1 (ms)
9.71
9.10 −6.31 %
OneDNN, 7, 1 (ms)
4166.31
4164.74 −0.04 %
OneDNN, 7, 2 (ms)
4166.40
4161.15 −0.13 %
OneDNN, 7, 3 (ms)
4164.25
4163.34 −0.02 %
Table 5. Performance comparison of Linux CFS and Ekiben
WFQ on the NAS Parallel Benchmarks and a selection of the
Phoronix Multicore benchmarks (version 10.8). Full names
are provided in the appendix. The maximum slowdown is
8.57%. The geometric mean over all benchmarks is 0.74%.

Latency CFS CFS One Core Random Hints
50th (𝜇s)
33
17
46
2
99th (𝜇s)
50
32032
49
4
Table 6. Wakeup latency for the schbench benchmark with
two message threads and two worker threads per message
thread. Thread wakeup latencies were in microseconds. All
runs used a 5s warmup time and ran the benchmark for 30s.
we were picking runnable tasks. This helped us identify and
address bugs faster because we would see a compile time error
from pick_next_task returning an incorrect Schedulable
thread rather than putting the kernel into a bad state by trying
to run a task on the wrong core.
We ran into relatively few runtime bugs, and those bugs
were fairly easy to address. Most have been deadlocks, which
are painful to encounter because they force a reboot, but
proved surprisingly easy to debug, in line with prior OS development experience [16]. Often, relatively few lock operations
were touched in between two runs of the code, so finding the
relevant changes to lock operations was easy. With more complicated deadlocks, it was easy to look through the scheduler
code and check the order of lock acquires because the largest
scheduler (WFQ) was only around 600 lines of code. Of the
non-deadlock bugs, most were conceptual, such as a benchmark having tasks yield when we had not yet implemented
task_yield or miscalculating the fair time slice to assign
tasks in WFQ. While fixing these bugs sometimes required
rebooting the machine, we never had to recompile the kernel
to fix them, so our iteration times were quite short.
The general design of an interposable, message-passing
based interface that uses memory sharing under the hood had
a number of benefits. We gained many of the benefits of modularity for development velocity because of clean interfaces and
isolation from the rest of the kernel, allowing the developer to
focus their energy on the algorithm being implemented. In its
implementation, Ekiben uses function calls and memory sharing, limiting the overhead that can come with modular designs.
Because Ekiben schedulers run in the kernel, the core scheduling code can quickly and easily make synchronous calls to the
scheduler, allowing it to quickly respond to changes in state.
Ekiben’s design also made it easy to implement additional
features. Because all the functionality was contained in the
module and Ekiben-C contacts the scheduler through a single
function pointer, live upgrade is as simple as quiescing the
state and replacing the function pointer. Due to Rust’s support
for generic data types and traits, custom hint data structures
could be defined as type parameters on the scheduler and
any requirements on the data types can be expressed as trait
bounds. Ekiben’s design supported record and replay debugging very smoothly. The interposable, message passing based
interface and made it simple to record relevant state that was
passed into the scheduler or returned from calls into the kernel.
Recording nondeterministic behavior is one of the main challenges for record and replay on parallel systems, but using safe

with no prior experience in Linux kernel development. They
were able to start coding with relatively little ramp up and
were able to build, test, and debug their code on their own.
They primarily benefited from modularity, because they were
using Ekiben when record and replay and live upgrade had
not been implemented.
Being able to use the Schedulable data structure as proof
that a task is schedulable on a core allowed us to ensure that
11

Rust made this much simpler. Due to Rust’s safety guarantees,
we knew that the scheduler could not contain race conditions
or any other undefined behavior, so the only sources of nondeterminism were timing and the order of lock acquisitions.
All timing state was handled by the kernel and passed into the
scheduler, and so was automatically handled by recording the
messages. To correctly handle concurrency, we only needed
to record and replay the order in which locks were acquired.

7

loops. For example, it would be difficult to express a red-black
tree or B-tree in eBPF, as used in CFS and WFQ.
Live Upgrade. Live upgrade in Ekiben is most similar to
the techniques used in Bento [48], but applied to schedulers.
Plugsched [43] does live upgrade of the entire scheduler subsystem of the Linux kernel without modifying any kernel
code using code analysis to detect boundaries of the scheduler subsystem and stack analysis to maintain consistent state
across the upgrade. Other tools for live upgrade of Linux systems include ksplice [5, 55], kpatch [60], or kGraft [58]. These
replace individual functions with new implementations, and
are primarily used for security patches that do not modify kernel data structures. Other research systems, such as K42 [11],
PROTEOS [28], LUCOS [21], and DynAMOS [44], support
upgrading complex, modular components in either new operating systems (K42 and PROTEOS) or in Linux using shadow
data structures or virtualization (LUCOS and DynAMOS).
Our work enables live upgrade of large modules in a commodity operating system with state transfer by introducing
a framework layer that handles quiescing state.
Running in Userspace. Running operating system services in userspace can also increase development velocity of
operating system components [1, 40], though this can sacrifice performance. Most similar to Ekiben is GhOSt [32].
Another approach is to run the component in userspace on
dedicated cores with communication through shared memory queues [10, 13, 35, 45]. This approach has been used for
implementing new network stacks [35, 45] and scheduler algorithms [34, 62]. With direct access to hardware devices, performance can often be competitive with an equivalent kernel
implementation. However, interaction with the rest of the kernel can be restricted using this approach, possibly limiting the
ability for any part of the system to make global decisions [66].
Record and Replay. Record and replay systems enable debugging code by first recording a trace of operations and then
later replaying those operations against the target code, enabling debugging of the recorded trace. These systems require
instrumentation around the target code in order to record the
necessary data. There are a variety of approaches to record
and replay, from recording the whole system [25, 68] to using
kernel instrumentation to record user programs [24, 46, 65]
to running both the target code and the instrumentation in
userspace [15, 27, 57, 67] to instrumenting language and application runtimes [2, 19]. One project [20] specifically records
and replays kernel modules using mechanisms for whole
binary analysis and instrumentation of kernel module interfaces. As far as we know, we are the first project to selectively
record a kernel module, as opposed to the whole kernel, and
to replay the behavior at userspace on the same code as ran
in the kernel. There is a long history of work on deterministic
record and replay on multicore systems to ensure that data
accesses are performed in the same order during record and
replay [3, 18, 30, 31, 37, 52, 65]. We combine content-based
message passing recording, where the content of all messages

Related Work

Scheduler Frameworks. GhOSt [32] is the closest analog
to Ekiben. It allows the user to replace the kernel scheduler
with a userspace scheduler. Calls to the kernel scheduler are
forwarded to the userspace scheduler agent, which responds
with decisions that are then applied in the kernel. The kernel
does not wait for decisions from the userspace scheduler to
schedule a task, instead applying decisions asynchronously
at a later call into the kernel scheduler. GhOSt provides good
development velocity but can add significant overhead and
scheduling latency, and the asynchronous model makes it difficult to precisely mirror kernel scheduler decisions. Mvondo
et.al. [50] also proposed a framework for implementing new
schedulers in Linux, inspired by how eBPF enables developers
to implement new networking functionality for the kernel.
As far as we can tell, this system has not been built yet. AMD
engineers have proposed a method for providing userspace
hints to a kernel scheduler [53], but only a small number of
predefined types of hints are supported.
Safe Languages in OS Development. It is common for research operating systems to be written entirely in a type-safe
high-level language. Examples include Pilot [63], SPIN [14],
Singularity [33], Biscuit [22], Redox [64], Tock [38], Theseus [17], and RedLeaf [51]. None of these target improving
development velocity for a widely used commercial operating
system. These approaches show that benefits can be gained
by using safe languages, but all involve rewriting the entire
operating system. We are also not the first to integrate Rust
into the Linux kernel [39, 41, 48], but these projects do not
provide safe interfaces for schedulers. Most similar to our
work is Bento [48]. Bento takes a similar approach to Ekiben
but applied to file systems. Because it targets file systems and
sits behind the kernel page cache, Bento can tolerate much
higher latency than Ekiben.
The Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF) [47] enables safe extensibility in Linux using a restricted, type safe language and
programming environment. eBPF programs can only be inserted at specific points in the kernel and are verified by the
kernel before being run. GhOSt [32] extends eBPF to enable
implementing part of the scheduler using eBPF. eBPF programs can be updated at runtime, but the locations where
code is inserted cannot be. To ensure safety of user code running in the kernel, eBPF is quite restrictive. Programs are
limited to only running at pre-defined points in the kernel,
only calling whitelisted functions, and not having unbounded
12

across a message passing interface are recorded, with a software only shared memory recording scheme, where synchronization and access to shared state are recorded. Unlike other
shared memory recording schemes, we do not have to detect
and record race conditions due to Rust’s safety guarantees,
so we record only synchronization accesses.

8

Conclusion

This paper presents Ekiben, a framework for rapid development of high performance Linux kernel schedulers. Ekiben
enables safe, high performance kernel schedulers with seamless live upgrade, bidirectional user communication channels,
and record and replay debugging. A scheduler implemented
with Ekiben is able to achieve similar performance to CFS, the
default Linux scheduler, on a wide range of benchmarks. Other
Ekiben schedulers mimic recent research schedulers, but integrated with Linux. Ekiben’s schedulers can be upgraded
with only 10.1𝑢s of service interruption, and the record and
replay debugging allows for slow but functional userspace
debugging of the kernel scheduler code.

13

References

[14] B. N. Bershad, S. Savage, P. Pardyak, E. G. Sirer, M. E. Fiuczynski, D.
Becker, C. Chambers, and S. Eggers. 1995. Extensibility Safety and Performance in the SPIN Operating System. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth
ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’95). 267–283.
[15] Sanjay Bhansali, Wen-Ke Chen, Stuart de Jong, Andrew Edwards, Ron
Murray, Milenko Drinić, Darek Mihočka, and Joe Chau. 2006. Framework for Instruction-Level Tracing and Analysis of Program Executions.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Virtual Execution
Environments (VEE ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 154–163. https://doi.org/10.1145/1134760.1220164
[16] Andrew Birrell. 1989.
An Introduction to Programming with
Threads.
Technical Report 35. Digital Systems Research Center.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/anintroduction-to-programming-with-threads/ A revised version
appeared in Systems Programming with Modula-3, Prentice Hall, 1991.
[17] Kevin Boos, Namitha Liyanage, Ramla Ijaz, and Lin Zhong. 2020.
Theseus: an Experiment in Operating System Structure and State
Management. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 1–19.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/boos
[18] Aurelien Bouteiller, George Bosilca, and Jack Dongarra. 2007. Retrospect: Deterministic Replay of MPI Applications for Interactive
Distributed Debugging. In Proceedings of the 14th European Conference
on Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing
Interface (PVM/MPI’07). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 297–306.
[19] Brian Burg, Richard Bailey, Amy J. Ko, and Michael D. Ernst. 2013.
Interactive Record/Replay for Web Application Debugging. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 473–484. https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502050
[20] Bo Chen, Zhenkun Yang, Li Lei, Kai Cong, and Fei Xie. 2020. Automated
Bug Detection and Replay for COTS Linux Kernel Modules with
Concolic Execution. In 2020 IEEE 27th International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). 172–183.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER48275.2020.9054797
[21] Haibo Chen, Rong Chen, Fengzhe Zhang, Binyu Zang, and Pen-Chung
Yew. 2006. Live Updating Operating Systems Using Virtualization. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Virtual Execution Environments (VEE ’06). 35–44. https://doi.org/10.1145/1134760.1134767
[22] Cody Cutler, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Robert T. Morris. 2018. The Benefits and Costs of Writing a POSIX Kernel in a High-Level Language. In
Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI’18). USENIX Association, USA, 89–105.
[23] Max Demoulin, Josh Fried, Isaac Pedisich, Marios Kogias, Boon Thau
Loo, Linh Thi Xuan Phan, and Irene Zhang. 2021. When Idling is Ideal:
Optimizing Tail-Latency for Highly-Dispersed Datacenter Workloads
with Perséphone. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’21).
[24] David Devecsery, Michael Chow, Xianzheng Dou, Jason Flinn, and
Peter M. Chen. 2014. Eidetic Systems. In 11th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 14). USENIX
Association, Broomfield, CO, 525–540. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/osdi14/technical-sessions/presentation/devecsery
[25] George W. Dunlap, Samuel T. King, Sukru Cinar, Murtaza A. Basrai,
and Peter M. Chen. 2003. ReVirt: Enabling Intrusion Analysis through
Virtual-Machine Logging and Replay. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 36, SI
(dec 2003), 211–224. https://doi.org/10.1145/844128.844148
[26] eBPF.io. 2023. eBPF. https://ebpf.io/
[27] Dennis Geels, Gautam Altekar, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. 2006.
Replay Debugging for Distributed Applications. In 2006 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (ATC ’06). USENIX Association, Boston, MA.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/2006-usenix-annual-technicalconference/replay-debugging-distributed-applications

[1] Mike Accetta, Robert Baron, William Bolosky, David Golub, Richard
Rashid, Avadis Tevanian, and Michael Young. 1986. Mach: A New
Kernel Foundation For UNIX Development. In Summer USENIX.
[2] Bowen Alpern, Jong-Deok Choi, Ton Ngo, Manu Sridharan, and
John M. Vlissides. 2001. A Perturbation-Free Replay Platform for
Cross-Optimized Multithreaded Applications. In Proceedings of the
15th International Parallel &; Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS
’01). IEEE Computer Society, USA, 23.
[3] Gautam Altekar and Ion Stoica. 2009. ODR: Output-Deterministic
Replay for Multicore Debugging. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS
22nd Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 193–206.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1629575.1629594
[4] Thomas E. Anderson, Brian N. Bershad, Edward D. Lazowska, and
Henry M. Levy. 1991. Scheduler Activations: Effective Kernel Support
for the User-Level Management of Parallelism. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’91).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 95–109.
https://doi.org/10.1145/121132.121151
[5] Jeff Arnold and M. Frans Kaashoek. 2009. Ksplice: Automatic
Rebootless Kernel Updates. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’09). 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1519065.1519085
[6] Berk Atikoglu, Yuehai Xu, E. Frachtenberg, Song Jiang, and Mike
Paleczny. 2012. Workload analysis of a large-scale key-value store. In
Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems.
[7] D. H. Bailey, E. Barszcz, J. T. Barton, D. S. Browning, R. L. Carter, L.
Dagum, R. A. Fatoohi, P. O. Frederickson, T. A. Lasinski, R. S. Schreiber,
H. D. Simon, V. Venkatakrishnan, and S. K. Weeratunga. 1991. The
NAS Parallel Benchmarks—Summary and Preliminary Results. In
Proceedings of the 1991 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing
(Supercomputing ’91). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 158–165. https://doi.org/10.1145/125826.125925
[8] Antonio Barbalace, Marina Sadini, Saif Ansary, Christopher Jelesnianski, Akshay Ravichandran, Cagil Kendir, Alastair Murray,
and Binoy Ravindran. 2015. Popcorn: Bridging the Programmability Gap in Heterogeneous-ISA Platforms. In Proceedings of
the Tenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys
’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2741948.2741962
[9] Luiz Barroso, Urs Hölzle, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan.
2018.
The Datacenter as a Computer: Designing WarehouseScale Machines, Third Edition. Vol. 13.
https://doi.org/10.2200/
S00874ED3V01Y201809CAC046
[10] Andrew Baumann, Paul Barham, Pierre-Evariste Dagand, Tim Harris,
Rebecca Isaacs, Simon Peter, Timothy Roscoe, Adrian Schüpbach, and
Akhilesh Singhania. 2009. The Multikernel: A New OS Architecture
for Scalable Multicore Systems. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’09). 29–44.
[11] Andrew Baumann, Gernot Heiser, Jonathan Appavoo, Dilma Da Silva,
Orran Krieger, Robert W. Wisniewski, and Jeremy Kerr. 2005. Providing
Dynamic Update in an Operating System. In USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (ATC ’05). 1 pages.
[12] Adam Belay, Andrea Bittau, Ali Mashtizadeh, David Terei, David
Mazières, and Christos Kozyrakis. 2012. Dune: Safe User-Level
Access to Privileged CPU Features. In Proceedings of the 10th USENIX
Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’12).
USENIX Association, USA, 335–348.
[13] Brian Bershad, Thomas E. Anderson, Edward D. Lazowska, and
Henry M. Levy. 1991. User-level Interprocess Communication for
Shared Memory Multiprocessors. ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems 9, 2 (May 1991).

14

[42] Jean-Pierre Lozi, Baptiste Lepers, Justin Funston, Fabien Gaud, Vivien
Quéma, and Alexandra Fedorova. 2016. The Linux Scheduler: A
Decade of Wasted Cores. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1, 16 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2901318.2901326
[43] Teng Ma, Shanpei Chen, Yihao Wu, Erwei Deng, Zhuo Song, Quan
Chen, and Minyi Guo. 2023. Efficient Scheduler Live Update for
Linux Kernel with Modularization. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3 (ASPLOS 2023). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 194–207.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3582016.3582054
[44] Kristis Makris and Kyung Dong Ryu. 2007. Dynamic and Adaptive
Updates of Non-Quiescent Subsystems in Commodity Operating
System Kernels. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys
European Conference on Computer Systems 2007 (EuroSys ’07). 327–340.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1272996.1273031
[45] Michael Marty, Marc de Kruijf, Jacob Adriaens, Christopher Alfeld,
Sean Bauer, Carlo Contavalli, Michael Dalton, Nandita Dukkipati,
William C. Evans, Steve Gribble, and et al. 2019. Snap: A Microkernel
Approach to Host Networking. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’19). 399–413.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3341301.3359657
[46] Ali José Mashtizadeh, Tal Garfinkel, David Terei, David Mazières,
and Mendel Rosenblum. 2017.
Towards Practical Default-On
Multi-Core Record/Replay. SIGPLAN Not. 52, 4 (apr 2017), 693–708.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3093336.3037751
[47] Steven McCanne and Jacobson Van. 1993. The BSD Packet Filter: A
New Architecture for User-level Packet Capture. In Winter USENIX.
[48] Samantha Miller, Kaiyuan Zhang, Mengqi Chen, Ryan Jennings, Ang
Chen, Danyang Zhuo, and Thomas Anderson. 2021. High Velocity
Kernel File Systems with Bento. In 19th USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (FAST 21). USENIX Association, 65–79.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast21/presentation/miller
Mutilate.
Retrieved May 1, 2023 from
[49] Mutilate 2015.
https://github.com/leverich/mutilate
[50] Djob Mvondo, Antonio Barbalace, Jean-Pierre Lozi, and Gilles Muller.
2022. Towards User-Programmable Schedulers in the Operating
System Kernel. https://sites.google.com/view/spma22eurosys/home
The 11th Workshop on Systems for Post-Moore Architectures, SPMA
2022 ; Conference date: 05-04-2022 Through 05-04-2022.
[51] Vikram Narayanan, Tianjiao Huang, David Detweiler, Dan Appel,
Zhaofeng Li, Gerd Zellweger, and Anton Burtsev. 2020. RedLeaf:
Isolation and Communication in a Safe Operating System. In 14th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 21–39. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/osdi20/presentation/narayanan-vikram
[52] S. Narayanasamy, G. Pokam, and B. Calder. 2005. BugNet: continuously
recording program execution for deterministic replay debugging. In
32nd International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA’05).
284–295. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2005.16
[53] K Prateek Nayak. 2022. sched: Userspace Hinting for Task Placement.
https://lwn.net/Articles/907680/
[54] Edmund B. Nightingale, Orion Hodson, Ross McIlroy, Chris Hawblitzel,
and Galen Hunt. 2009. Helios: Heterogeneous Multiprocessing
with Satellite Kernels. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 221–234.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1629575.1629597
[55] Oracle Ksplice 2009. Oracle Ksplice. Retrieved January 18, 2023 from
https://ksplice.oracle.com/
[56] Amy Ousterhout, Joshua Fried, Jonathan Behrens, Adam Belay,
and Hari Balakrishnan. 2019. Shenango: Achieving High CPU

[28] Cristiano Giuffrida, Anton Kuijsten, and Andrew S. Tanenbaum. 2013.
Safe and Automatic Live Update for Operating Systems. In Proceedings
of the Eighteenth International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’13). 279–292.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2451116.2451147
[29] Robert Glaubius, Terry Tidwell, Christopher Gill, and William D.
Smart. 2010. Real-Time Scheduling via Reinforcement Learning. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence (UAI ’10). AUAI Press, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 201–209.
[30] Zhenyu Guo, Xi Wang, Jian Tang, Xuezheng Liu, Zhilei Xu, Ming Wu,
M. Frans Kaashoek, and Zheng Zhang. 2008. R2: An Application-Level
Kernel for Record and Replay. In Proceedings of the 8th USENIX
Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’08).
USENIX Association, USA, 193–208.
[31] Jeff Huang, Peng Liu, and Charles Zhang. 2010. LEAP: Lightweight
Deterministic Multi-Processor Replay of Concurrent Java Programs. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 385–386.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1882291.1882361
[32] Jack Tigar Humphries, Neel Natu, Ashwin Chaugule, Ofir Weisse, Barret
Rhoden, Josh Don, Luigi Rizzo, Oleg Rombakh, Paul Turner, and Christos Kozyrakis. 2021. GhOSt: Fast & Flexible User-Space Delegation of
Linux Scheduling. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3477132.3483542
[33] Galen C. Hunt and James R. Larus. 2007. Singularity: Rethinking
the Software Stack. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 41, 2 (apr 2007), 37–49.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1243418.1243424
[34] Kostis Kaffes, Timothy Chong, Jack Tigar Humphries, Adam Belay,
David Mazières, and Christos Kozyrakis. 2019. Shinjuku: Preemptive
Scheduling for 𝜇second-scale Tail Latency. In Proceedings of the
16th USENIX Conference on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’19). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 345–360.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/kaffes
[35] Antoine Kaufmann, Tim Stamler, Simon Peter, Naveen Kr. Sharma,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Thomas E. Anderson. 2019. TAS: TCP
Acceleration as an OS Service. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth EuroSys
Conference 2019 (EuroSys ’19). Article 24.
[36] Julia Lawall, Himadri Chhaya-Shailesh, Jean-Pierre Lozi, Baptiste
Lepers, Willy Zwaenepoel, and Gilles Muller. 2022. OS Scheduling with
Nest: Keeping Tasks Close Together on Warm Cores. In Proceedings of
the Seventeenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’22).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 368–383.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3492321.3519585
[37] Thomas LeBlanc and John Mellor-Crummey. 1987. Debugging Parallel
Programs with Instant Replay. IEEE Trans. Comput. 36, 4 (apr 1987),
471–482. https://doi.org/10.1109/TC.1987.1676929
[38] Amit Levy, Bradford Campbell, Branden Ghena, Daniel B. Giffin, Pat
Pannuto, Prabal Dutta, and Philip Levis. 2017. Multiprogramming
a 64kB Computer Safely and Efficiently. In Proceedings of the 26th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’17). 234–251.
[39] Zhuohua Li, Jincheng Wang, Mingshen Sun, and John C.S. Lui.
2019. Securing the Device Drivers of Your Embedded Systems:
Framework and Prototype. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES ’19). Article
71. https://doi.org/10.1145/3339252.3340506
[40] Jochen Liedtke. 1995. On Microkernel Construction. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP
’95). 237–250.
[41] Linux-kernel-module-rust 2021. Linux-kernel-module-rust. Retrieved
Janurary 18, 2023 from https://github.com/fishinabarrel/linux-kernelmodule-rust

15

Efficiency for Latency-sensitive Datacenter Workloads. In 16th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 361–378.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/ousterhout
[57] Harish Patil, Cristiano Pereira, Mack Stallcup, Gregory Lueck, and
James Cownie. 2010. PinPlay: A Framework for Deterministic Replay
and Reproducible Analysis of Parallel Programs. In Proceedings of the
8th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and
Optimization (CGO ’10). 2–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/1772954.1772958
[58] Vojtech Pavlik. 2021. kGraft: Live Kernel Patching. Retrieved January
18, 2023 from https://www.suse.com/c/kgraft-live-kernel-patching/
[59] Phoronix 2023. Phoronix Multicore. Retrieved Janurary 18, 2023 from
https://openbenchmarking.org/suite/pts/multicore
[60] Josh Poimboeuf. 2022. Introducing kpatch: Dynamic Kernel Patching.
Retrieved January 18, 2023 from https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/
introducing-kpatch-dynamic-kernel-patching
[61] Arash Pourhabibi, Mark Sutherland, Alexandros Daglis, and Babak
Falsafi. 2021. Cerebros: Evading the RPC Tax in Datacenters. In
MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO ’21). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 407–420. https://doi.org/10.1145/3466752.3480055
[62] Henry Qin, Qian Li, Jacqueline Speiser, Peter Kraft, and John
Ousterhout. 2018.
Arachne: Core-Aware Thread Management.
In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI ’18). USENIX Association, Carlsbad, CA.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/qin
[63] David D. Redell, Yogen K. Dalal, Thomas R. Horsley, Hugh C.
Lauer, William C. Lynch, Paul R. McJones, Hal G. Murray, and
Stephen C. Purcell. 1980.
Pilot: An Operating System for a
Personal Computer.
Commun. ACM 23, 2 (Feb. 1980), 81–92.
https://doi.org/10.1145/358818.358822
[64] Redox 2022.
Redox.
Retrieved Janurary 18, 2023 from
https://www.redox-os.org/
[65] Michiel Ronsse and Koen De Bosschere. 1999. RecPlay: A Fully
Integrated Practical Record/Replay System. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst.
17, 2 (may 1999), 133–152. https://doi.org/10.1145/312203.312214
[66] Hugo Sadok, Zhipeng Zhao, Valerie Choung, Nirav Atre, Daniel S.
Berger, James C. Hoe, Aurojit Panda, and Justine Sherry. 2021. We
Need Kernel Interposition over the Network Dataplane. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS ’21).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 152–158.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3458336.3465281
[67] Yasushi Saito. 2005. Jockey: A User-Space Library for Record-Replay
Debugging. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium
on Automated Analysis-Driven Debugging (AADEBUG’05). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 69–76.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1085130.1085139
[68] Min Xu, Vyacheslav Malyugin, Jeffrey Sheldon, Ganesh Venkitachalam,
and Boris Weissman. 2007. Retrace: Collecting execution trace with
virtual machine deterministic replay. In In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual
Workshop on Modeling, Benchmarking and Simulation, MoBS.

16

A

Appendix

Arrayfire, 1
Arrayfire, BLAS CPU
Arrayfire, Conjugate Gradient CPU
Arrayfire, 2
Cassandra, 1
Cassandra, Writes
ASKAP, Hogbom Clean OpenMP
ASKAP, 4
Cpuminer, 2
Cpuminer, Triple SH-256 Onecoin
Cpuminer, Quad SHA-256 Pyrite
Cpuminer, 3
Cpuminer, 4
Cpuminer, Myriad-Groestl
Cpuminer, 6
Cpuminer, Blake-2 S
Cpuminer, Skeincoin
Cpuminer, 11
Ffmpeg, 1, 1
Ffmpeg, libx264, Live
Graphics-Magick, 4 Graphics-Magick, Resizing
OIDN, 1
OIDN, RT.hdr_alb_nrm.3840x2160
OIDN, RT.ldr_alb_nrm.3840x2160
OIDN, 2
OIDN, 3
OIDN, RTLightmap.hdr.4096x4096
Rodina, OpenMP Leukocyte
Rodina, 3
Zstd, 2
Zstd, 3 Long Mode Compression
Zstd, 4
Zstd, 8 Long Mode Compression
AVIFEnc, 4
AVIFEnc, 6 Lossless
Libgav1, 1
Libgav1, Summer Nature 1080p
Libgav1, 2
Libgav1, Summer Nature 4k
Libgav1, 3
Libgav1, Chimera 1080p
Libgav1, 4
Libgav1, Chimera 1080p 10-bit
OneDNN, 4, 1
OneDNN, IP Shapes 1D, f32
OneDNN, 5, 1
OneDNN, IP Shapes 3D, f32
OneDNN, 7, 1
OneDNN, RNN Training, f32
OneDNN, 7, 2
OneDNN, RNN Training, u8s8f32
OneDNN, RNN Training, bf16bf16bf16
OneDNN, 7, 3
Table 7. Full names of the Phoronix Multicore benchmarks
presented in the paper.
A.1 WFQ Functional Equivalence
We run several benchmarks to evaluate whether our Ekiben
WFQ scheduler correctly implements the expected behavior
of a WFQ scheduler. We compare the Ekiben WFQ scheduler
to CFS, also a WFQ scheduler, to ensure that our scheduler
implements equivalent behavior.
One benchmark evaluates whether the scheduler fairly
shares CPU time among ready tasks. This benchmark started
five tasks that each perform CPU-intensive work, specifically repeatedly adding to a value. By default these tasks are
placed on different cores. We expect these tasks to complete
in roughly the same amount of time due to the lack of competition. We then force the schedulers to place all of the tasks on
the same core. We saw the expected behavior. On both schedulers, the tasks took around 4.6 seconds to complete when
the tasks are not co-located. When the tasks were co-located,
the tasks took around 22.2 seconds.
We also evaluate how the schedulers handle weighting by
reducing one of the five tasks to minimum priority. We would
expect the lowest priority task to complete slower than the others; the other tasks should share time fairly and complete in the
17

same amount of time. Again, we saw the expected behavior on
both schedulers. When one task was reduced to the minimum
priority, all four other tasks complete in around 17.6 seconds
and the lowest priority task completes in 4.4 seconds later.
A third benchmark tests task placements. We start one
task per core with each task performing CPU-intensive work,
specifically repeatedly adding to a value. We expect both
schedulers to default to placing each task on a separate core.
We then force one task to change cores. With no movement,
each task completes in around 9 seconds on both schedulers
and there is very low variation in task runtime. When a task
is moved, all tasks still complete in around 9 seconds on both
schedulers. CFS shows roughly the same variation in task runtime even when a task was moved. The Ekiben WFQ scheduler
shows higher standard deviation in task runtimes when a task
is moved, from 0.001s to 0.018s, because it takes longer to move
a task due to its less sophisticated methods of rebalancing
tasks.

